More on Templates
===========================================

The following are a smattering of toipcs related to templates.


Cleaning Up
-----------

DMP caches its compiled templates in subdirectories of each app. The default locations for each app are ``app/templates/.cached_templates``, ``app/scripts/.cached_templates``, and ``app/styles/.cached_templates``, although the exact name depends on your settings.py. Normally, these cache directories are hidden and warrant your utmost apathy. However, there are times when DMP fails to update a cached template as it should. Or you might just need a pristine project without these generated files. This can be done with a Unix find command or through DMP's ``dmp_cleanup`` management command:

::

    # see what would be be done without actually deleting any cache folders
    python manage.py dmp_cleanup --trial-run

    # really delete the folders
    python manage.py dmp_cleanup

Sass also generates compiled files that you can safely remove. When you create a .scss file, Sass generates two additional files: ``.css`` and ``.css.map``. If you later remove the .scss, you leave the two generated, now orphaned, files in your ``styles`` directory. While some editors remove these files automatically, you can also remove them through DMP's ``dmp_sass_cleanup`` management command:

::

    # see what would be be done without actually deleting anything
    python manage.py dmp_sass_cleanup --trial-run

    # really delete the files
    python manage.py dmp_sass_cleanup

With both of these management commands, add ``--verbose`` to the command to include messages about skipped files, and add ``--quiet`` to silence all messages (except errors).

    You might be wondering how DMP knows whether a file is a regular
    .css or a Sass-generated one. It looks in your .css files for a line
    starting with ``/*# sourceMappingURL=yourtemplate.css.map */``. When
    it sees this marker, it decides that the file was generated by Sass
    and can be deleted if the matching .scss file doesn't exist. Any
    .css files that omit this marker are skipped.


Templates Located Elsewhere
---------------------------

This impacts few users of DMP, so you may want to skip this section for now.

Suppose your templates are located in a directory outside your normal project root. For whatever reason, you don't want to put your templates in the app/templates directory.

Case 1: Templates Within Your Project Directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the templates you need to access are within your project directory, no extra setup is required. Simply reference those templates relative to the root project directory. For example, to access a template located at BASE\_DIR/homepage/mytemplates/sub1/page.html, use the following:

.. code:: python

    return dmp_render(request, '/homepage/mytemplates/sub1/page.html', context)

Note the starting slash on the path. That tells DMP to start searching at your project root.

Don't confuse the slashes in the above call with the slash used in Django's ``render`` function. When you call ``render``, the slash separates the app and filename. The above call uses ``dmp_render``, which is a different function. You should really standardize on one or the other throughout your project.

Case 2: Templates Outside Your Project Directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Suppose your templates are located on a different disk or entirely different directory from your project. DMP allows you to add extra directories to the template search path through the ``TEMPLATES_DIRS`` setting. This setting contains a list of directories that are searched by DMP regardless of the app being referenced. To include the ``/var/templates/`` directory in the search path, set this variable as follows:

.. code:: python

    'TEMPLATES_DIRS': [
       '/var/templates/',
    ],

Suppose, after making the above change, you need to render the '/var/templates/page1.html' template:

.. code:: python

    return dmp_render(request, 'page1.html', context)

DMP will first search the current app's ``templates`` directory (i.e. the normal way), then it will search the ``TEMPLATES_DIRS`` list, which in this case contains ``/var/templates/``. Your ``page1.html`` template will be found and rendered.

Template Inheritance Across Apps
--------------------------------

You may have noticed that this tutorial has focused on a single app. Most projects consist of many apps. For example, a sales site might have an app for user management, an app for product management, and an app for the catalog and sales/shopping-cart experience. All of these apps probably want the same look and feel, and all of them likely want to extend from the **same** ``base.htm`` file.

When you run ``python3 manage.py dmp_startapp <appname>``, you get **new** ``base.htm`` and ``base_ajax.htm`` files each time. This is done to get you started on your first app. On your second, third, and subsequent apps, you probably want to delete these starter files and instead extend your templates from the ``base.htm`` and ``base_ajax.htm`` files in your first app.

In fact, in my projects, I usually create an app called ``base_app`` that contains the common ``base.htm`` html code, site-wide CSS, and site-wide Javascript. Subsequent apps simply extend from ``/base_app/templates/base.htm``. The common ``base_app`` doesn't really have end-user templates in it -- they are just supertemplates that support other, public apps.

DMP supports cross-app inheritance by including your project root (e.g. ``settings.BASE_DIR``) in the template lookup path. All you need to do is use the full path (relative to the project root) to the template in the inherits statement.

Suppose I have the following app structure:

::

    dmptest
        base_app/
            __init__.py
            media/
            scripts/
            styles/
            templates/
                site_base_ajax.htm
                site_base.htm
            views/
                __init__.py
        homepage/
            __init__.py
            media/
            scripts/
            styles/
            templates/
                index.html
            views/
                __init__.py

I want ``homepage/templates/index.html`` to extend from ``base_app/templates/site_base.htm``. The following code in ``index.html`` sets up the inheritance:

.. code:: html

            <%inherit file="/base_app/templates/site_base.htm" />

Again, the front slash in the name above tells DMP to start the lookup at the project root.

    In fact, my pages are often three inheritance levels deep:
    ``base_app/templates/site_base.htm -> homepage/templates/base.htm -> homepage/templates/index.html``
    to provide for site-wide page code, app-wide page code, and specific
    page code.




Importing Python Modules
-------------------------------

It's easy to import Python modules in your Mako templates. Simply use a module-level block:

.. code:: python

    <%!
        import datetime
        from decimal import Decimal
    %>

or a Python-level block (see the Mako docs for the difference):

.. code:: python

    <%
        import datetime
        from decimal import Decimal
    %>

There may be some modules, such as ``re`` or ``decimal`` that are so useful you want them available in every template of your site. In settings.py, add these to the ``DEFAULT_TEMPLATE_IMPORTS`` variable:

.. code:: python

    DEFAULT_TEMPLATE_IMPORTS = [
        'import os, os.path, re',
        'from decimal import Decimal',
    ],

Any entries in this list will be automatically included in templates throughout all apps of your site. With the above imports, you'll be able to use ``re`` and ``Decimal`` and ``os`` and ``os.path`` anywhere in any .html, .cssm, and .jsm file.

    Whenever you modify the DMP settings, be sure to clean out your
    cached templates with ``python manage.py dmp_cleanup``. This ensures
    your compiled templates are rebuilt with the new settings.